Title:      Codes-and-languages-2009-2010
Subtitle:   optional
IsPartOf:   Name of parent publication
Authors:    Author 1
            Author 2
Summary:    A brief description of your document.
Type:       default 
            map
Mode:       canvas
            cinematic



# poems_o._van_nooten {: style='top: 464px; left: 1551.75px;' }

Lemniscapes 
10 gedichten/10 poems
Observations by Olivier van Nooten 






##New exercise
 
Interest is not intention
Intense interaction still
In ten seconds all boundaries dissolve...
		           until


 
Vangen: ontvangen: ontvankelijk

Het lijkt of – nee het lijkt op
niets tenzij betekenis vereist is
ontkom ik niet aan invulling
wanneer mijn hoofd de lijn mist?

Zeg mezelf: het mag, het mag
te zien zonder begrijpen, als een
danser in verwarring plots stopt
en net als ik er bij zit
 
##Crash along

Hear all bodies twist
and shout to overcome
gravity and time enough
for lines beyond beginning

(but not for long
on butt fur lung)

to an end means nothing 
less then just for now 
forgotten

rest your head 
to leave the neck 
only muscles 
move and sing

##Ga op

Voeten voelen vloer ze
tasten nog te lopen paden af 
en aandacht langzaam langs
verzonken in gedachten of 
zonder plan boven de bodem.

In een hoek gekozen kijk ik toe
steeds bewuster van mijn houding
tot dansend over blad de inkt me 
meedogenloos in lijnen vergeet






##Breaking the gaze

Eyes never leave the window
so how fragile is the audience
intended so transparent even
dialogue might go through
when suddenly the rules bend
and language unknown giggles


 
##“If you want it to happen, don’t say it”

en tussen regels door bewegen
woorden rond gelande dansers
grond heeft ze gevonden nu
ze zitten kijken horen spreken.

Frisse lucht daagt tevergeefs
de neergestreken wezens uit
toch toe te geven aan de tocht
gedoofd gedogen ze gebogen
 
##History repeating

Connected to what happened
movements explore the next
past, then again dismantled
by the need to be progressive

how personal the skin and still
will untouched land be found
if eyes are clear enough not to 
look back in search of contrast




 
##Uit de lamp

De richting laat zich raden
loopt uit de hand en voeten
nee verder nog, van top tot
teen of weer en heen of voor 
het eerst de geest is los gelaten
 
##Paradox

Ze draaien om hun as
de rollen tot het onderste
verstrikt weer boven ligt
maar nu ontdaan van stof

knap lastig is te vangen
wat wil vliegen om te zijn
als de leden maten tekens 
niks te maken hebben met


 
##Blisters

Frames on fire
heat their feet,
the need to feel
free from flames

enlightened by the
tired flesh in death
no generations lost
longing for fresh

# Alexandra Maciejewska {: style='top: 3px; left: 617px; width: 271.167px; height: 400.167px;' }

 
Alexandra Maciejewska:

##Danslab Series  
The codes and languages in the relationship between choreographers and dancers
Den Hague 2010
 
 
Hereby my reflections produced by the encounters …when I say this (‘hereby my reflections produced by the encounters’) it does not mean that I have produced thoughts. Certainly, I was witnessing (partly participating in) encounters of opinions. And it is what I found very empowering, the possibility of that to happen, however I am very curious how that (the last session) will turn into a thought…What will be the product of this encounters? Can it be proud of itself and able to walk on the dance field ? 
From my observations (summer) …
I have made a simplistic division at the very beginning in order to have a fair base for my thoughts. I have made my own encounter by saying: Lets equal language to a specificity of a choreographic idiom, like a specificity of a language that is governed by grammatical rules etc, and additionally lets equal the code to generally understood systems of rules that helps to produce or interpret signs (social codes).
 
Concluding, via my simplistic division. Gabriella is open to invite all possible and impossible propositions that would inform and transform her understanding of a code and even the language she uses, whereas Andrea does not question the understanding of the code but welcomes different personalities to interpret what she proposes as a language. 
 
A short conclusion…
Now, I will try to be very concise about where this encounters brought me. It goes like this: Language, partly, constitutes on construction of sense. This sense often falls into regimes of certain logic. Any logic is quite impossible because it possesses capacities for self-destruction, an encounter is a potential for that to happen. Different set of arguments plus different sets of arguments will end up in the possible conflict. To put this into rehearsal: an encounter between a choreographer and a chorographer or a dancer with a choreographer etc. --- each caring different set of ideas, expectations, desires, knowing and not knowing, translating knowledge and interpreting knowledge will not easily slide without resistance. The resistance is needed. The resistance is needed because it must create a positive ambiguity a kind of silence that will feed the process of re-thinking ones own assumptions. 
After questions I asked …
 
When I entered the sessions, I came with a topic zooming into a question: This observation will focus around the area of power relationship between a performer and a choreographer. My question is; what are the features of a relationship between a dancer and a choreographer when a strong, fixed code-language is at work?  What are the forms of agreement? After participating, and zooming into insights I ended up making more questions… The power relationships are always at work; there is no freedom as such, because things inherently condition us. Therefore, one should reflect upon such constructions of conditionings, and when such does exist--- how this function not in terms of craftiness but in terms of it’s structuring (what assumptions build this relationship etc.)… Can we talk why we make dance? Can we talk about what made us make the dance we make? Can we talk about why we dance? What those needs reflect? Do you have sense ethics when you think about your practice? 
At the end, I am quite triggered and curious what this encounters will bring in terms of alliances …

#assignments and collected input{: style='left: 1233px; top: 14px;' }


##finding the ungraspable
-	My breathing reflect upon my space from inside
-	The sensation of thin and thick simultaneously in one part
-	Panic because of the unknown or do you know?
-	Painful sand in your throat that echo’s on your skin with an itch. You become a baby.
-	The ultimate
-	I want to tell you how much I love you…
-	Its many nuances of red, including a tone of black which makes it dark; it moves slowly, the sound is time, the time is atmosphere, drops; its beyond the touch but it has something in common with it, cause you can’t see it, neither hear it, eat it ect… it is inside your organs but you can perceive it outside you, far away; but it comes towards you, slowly and yet inevitably – it is scary – but vital, it has to see with being alive, although you know one day you will be dead
-	Emptiness
-	The smell of a memory
-	My intuition or my imagination as you wish….my feeling of thought

##DO YOU REMEMBER THE ASSIGNMENT?
##What do you don’t like on stage? We collect the messages, do not read them out loud, but let them perform by ourselves….
-	I don’t want to feel regret
-	I don’t want to take part in a show which critics the others or manipulates the audience.
-	I don’t like when they want me to feel emphatic their performance and moves of old fashioned messages
-	I don’t want to see chairs on stage ( a banch is ok)
-	I don’t want to be weak
-	I don’t want to be used in a way that I am not allowed to ask questions
-	I don’t want to see other peoples problems on stage
-	I don’t like to be exposed or invented to see what we all already know; like: banal statements etc
-	I don’t like to see metaphorical masturbations on stage; only the physical ones
-	I don’t want to get injured
-	I don’t want to get in social and psychological private problems with the people I am working with
-	I don’t want to perform something which I do not believe in
-	I don’t want to be seen as a table
-	I don’t want to be bored
-	I don’t like to be exposed or invited to see performances that rub in face
-	I don’t want to be abuse by the choreographer – as a dancer
-	I don’t like it when I am not able to join in
-	I don’t like artists who talk about money more than once every two weeks
-	I don’t want to be a slave to a concept
-	I don’t want to just explore ego
-	I don’t like wishy washy performances
-	I don’t like arrogant ‘know it all’s’ on stage
-	I don’t like artistic appropriation of social illness
-	I don’t like to be invited or exposed to performances that are not conscious of its own product

#cristina_-part 1 - mor and jack{: style='left: 913px; top: 102px;' }

Danslab 
The codes and languages in the relationship between choreographers and dancers

by Cristina Planas Leitão 											Den Haag 2010


I have to say that first of all, no matter what analysis we make of our behaviour in the studio, in relation with other people, in this case the relation dancer – choreographer, we can never discard our personal experiences and personality.
Many factors condition this relation, as any other relations, and they can go from silly things of how people look like and what we previously know about them to simple words they say or just 1st impressions. We are all full of Pygmalion effects and things such as expectations, interests and pre-conceived ideas, and all of those play, in my point of view a big role in these relations and its language.
For sure we all remember that we are people even before being dancers or choreographers.

My general interests before starting this frame are still the same. They remain questions which I believe make part of a long, long term research:

-Which information do I receive better as a dancer? What triggers me the most?
-As a director/choreographer/ teacher: how much information is enough and when is it too much? What is most efficient for creation: a clear task or a more metaphorical instruction?
-How does the fact that I like or not the work I am performing influences my performance and how do I still make it work?
-Specificity or Versatility (as a dancer)?
-Dancer or Performer?
-What's the ground 0 for the common language of dance?
-Importance of research? Does it become a product when it is shown? What are the by-products of it? Waste? What of it becomes production?
-What are the main differences in result and behaviour of a research period and a production period?
-Do we still research when we perform?
-What are the unspoken areas between dancers and choreographers?
-What’s the potentially of this Almost Something area.





“Communication is a process whereby information is enclosed in a package and is channelled and imparted by a sender to a receiver via some medium. The receiver then decodes the message and gives the sender a feedback. 

All forms of communication require a sender, a message, and an intended recipient. Communication requires that all parties have an area of communicative commonality. There are auditory means, such as speech, song, and tone of voice, and there are nonverbal means. 
Nonverbal communication (NVC) is usually understood as the process of communication through sending and receiving wordless messages. i.e., language is not the only source of communication, there are other means also. NVC can be communicated through gestures and touch (Haptic communication), by body language or posture, by facial expression and eye contact. NVC can be communicated through object communication such as clothing, hairstyles or even architecture, symbols and info graphics. Speech contains nonverbal elements known as paralanguage, including voice quality, emotion and speaking style, as well as prosodic features such as rhythm, intonation and stress. Dance is also regarded as a nonverbal communication. 
However, much of the study of nonverbal communication has focused on face-to-face interaction, where it can be classified into three principal areas: environmental conditions where communication takes place, the physical characteristics of the communicators, and behaviours of communicators during interaction.” 
And this is just Wikipedia ☺







##Encounter 1 (19th June 2010)

(Gabriella Maiorino with me and Valentina & Mor Shani with Stav Dror and Reut Shemesh)


I remember that one of the very first questions that arose on this day (and not just because of the choreographers in question but as this was the very first day of this project) was about the moment of passing information. Is it only choreographer to dancer or also the other way around?

Most certainly this question got an answer. For sure, we dancers also give a feedback in response to the stimulation provoked (see definition of communication above), otherwise would be like talking to a wall. Above all in the last periods of my own personal research and after some workshops in the last period, I figured out that the ones that are in the studio, on stage – the dancers – we have the ultimate power on the choreographer’s work if we talk about power relationships and assuming they are in a post audition/employer/employee phase. So yes, for me the communication is definitely both ways no matter the form and shape of the answer.

I also can’t ignore all that I know beforehand about the new choreographer that I am meeting.
However for these encounters I tried my best to walk in with an empty head and my premise was to fully trust the person I am meeting for the “first” time. This behaviour doesn’t happen for me many times in auditions for instance, where I also meet someone for the first time. I think for this case it was extremely important to try to erase all pre-conceived ideas about someone and to not judge too much.

We focused and discussed a lot about the very first moment of passing information. Therefore it becomes interesting for me to also talk about how to pass information.
Personally I am busy at the moment finding effective communication skills as a teacher, how much information do I give, do I use a metaphorical speech, an analytical one, do I simply give tasks, do I talk in a trippy text?
All this, conditions my understanding as a dancer of the choreographer’s proposal. To this problematic, Gabriella answered that, many times, in an instruction the contradiction of a task can bring some good tension to it. For instance in stead of saying “Now, do it in 1 minute”; Say “Now, do it in 1 minute BUT with the feeling of plenty of time”. Personally, I consider this a very important step into communicating because I think most of the times choreographers don’t just want to communicate with the dancers, they actually want to provoke some sort of happening and we dancers/performers are the vehicle for it.

Is it that they want to communicate and we are the receivers of their message? Or is the public the ultimate receiver and we, dancers, are the medium for that message to be delivered. I start to believe that it is more the second.

This is totally out of context but recently I spent some time in a workshop/ process with Meg Stuart and even in a class/ research context she would do the transitions between the exercises as if we were on stage.
She would never stop and say: “Ok, now we go on to the next exercise”. She would just whisper to each of us, tell some of us to tell the others, just do it herself and non-verbally show us something, etc.
This space of ambiguity – the space where something can almost happen - this “almost something” moments (not the “I’m a tiger” moment but maybe the “I’m almost a tiger but…” moments) are the ones were I think the potentially of creation resides, and these are the moments comprised in contradictory instructions, in vague speeches and in body language of non-verbal communication. These are the moments that give space for individual creativity where it can be this or maybe that. All this to say I felt this “almost” moments in Mor’s session where the warm-up merged with research and work session.

Of course I am talking on a personal taste level. When I speak about creation for me it relates more to states rather than steps or shapes and to eventually more improvised scores instead of fixed ones. But somehow I believe that this “Almost Something” space can be quite interesting as well for the “execution” of set material.

For me, this answers as well to the question of how much space does a choreographer leave to the dancer and about what is the role of the spoken word in these relations.
Of course it all depends of what kind of process and result you want to achieve.

There was also the question of how fast and actually how does a dancer adapt to a new choreographer. Personally, I don’t consider this such and important one. I don’t think we were part of an experiment here and I would place this in a more curiosity level. It’s like every relation. Some people we figure out sooner and others later.

More practical questions of how to prepare the dancers for the work and how to use them as a complex being also came to play. For me this also has to do with which methodologies you choose and which are your personal beliefs and what parts of the complex being you want to actually prepare: the personal, the physical, the spiritual one?
I do agree that many times the definition of the word “dancer” brings me to a place that I am not that anymore, specially after the “So you think you can dance” era and therefore from now on I will use the term performer, which can maybe bring me to a more elitist and pseudo-intellectual world but it defines better “a dancer” in her/his full complexity as a person. Performer means to me a more multi-layered being.

One of Mor’s questions was also: How to achieve the necessary intimacy in the studio?
I believe that Trust and Intimacy are very important factors that condition the work, especially in such a short period of time.
I felt very comfortable in the environment created that day. For me Availability, Adaptability and Negotiation are extremely important contributors to build the trust and intimacy required in a process.
Somehow I connect Mor more to intimacy and later on I could connect Jack to Trust. I don’t really know why yet, but I will go on that later….
Ambiguity: Mor's work session allowed space and freedom for me. Although I went through moments of doubt the fact that the task was not so clear made me go my own way. However I felt I could trust Mor in the way he was leading us. And as mentioned above I think he succeeded in creating this sphere of almost something environment.

I don’t know whether it is interesting to go deeply on each choreographer’s working session or not….
Anyhow, Mor drove us through a long working session that merged the warm up with the exploring/creating process.
From his work some aspects remained with me such as: the voices inside of us, the resonance of the place were I am in the room and how that affects the space itself and the others, the void, the social parameter of his work.

We spoke a lot about parameters of the work or possible ways to define the situation that you see from the audience point of view.
I consider this a very important tool to see the work. Yes, it can help us define it but can also help us to really go through with what we want to say and give it a little twist. We can change of course the space, the speed, dynamics, the colours, but we can change in our imagination numerous things, like our age, our appearance, or substance matter, being dead or alive and keep on doing the same instruction for instance.

Regarding definitions, I have to say I don’t agree so much with defining the work with more emotional, or theatrical or physical etc (referring to Reut about Gabriella's research and the emotional interpretation of the physical task). For me, as a performer, something very important is to achieve a state instead of a shape. The state for me opens infinite possibilities and therefore I don’t have the need to categorize the sort of action or emotion - they would be part of that same state. I see it from a complex point of view and in that case, the emotionality wouldn’t come on top of it, but would be part of it as almost a tornado coming upwards from within. 

Of course Gabriella's process was more familiar to me. The fact that we started with a clear physical task that gives the whole work a common layer and establishes a ground and the fact that I have also learnt to accept certain things like that kind of method. And my question is how to I get freedom within something that I know so well. It’s almost like doing a daily action everyday in a different way… I guess by constantly questioning it (not judging it) and seeing it with fresh eyes every time.

At the end of this day, for me it was very interesting to compare both "final" researches as different types of landscapes and describe the space, as I perceive it from inside.
Gabriella’s stage as being full from a point of departure and almost like spiralling up in intensity, having a specific physicality as a common ground for the performers and somehow lacking a counterpoint in it and Mor departing from an empty and more social stage, focusing on individuality and the fact that the “normality” can become anything through achieving a free mind without being blank.


I think the beauty of research is, many times, the fact that we don’t really know where we are going nor what is the purpose….





 


##Encounter 2 (26th June 2010)

(Gabriella Maiorino with me and Valentina & Jack Gallagher with Marjolein Vogels, Tan Temel and Sernaz Demirel)


For the second encounter I was more prepared and I could imagine a bit better what to expect.
I was also very curious to meet Jack and see how he approaches his work. 

We knew already he wanted to work with counter direction (with the key element for the day being direction: combined directions influence each other to create and 3rd movement event) and the physical side of the work. In a previous e-mail he had posed the question of how does a concept for movement, bridge the paradox of the mind/ body split and what’s the connection between the stuff of movement and the engagement of the dancer. 

Immediately in the beginning of this 2nd day it was clear that, for everyone, complexity was a big issue: In a personal level (dancer VS performer), in a research process level, in a product/ result level, in the information/ communication level.

I felt somehow very fascinated by Jack from the beginning and as I said before I think that also played a role in the trust that I somehow felt (and also decided to feel). I wanted to believe that he knew what he was doing and that he has a very strong artistic vision and would let us be part of his universe.
We spoke briefly about concepts that I would have liked to elaborate more on and eventually was not possible: self-censorship, violence-demand, exposure & comfort, trust and intimacy.

I got stuck with the idea of the body and mind split and realized I see it more as a whole – maximum, for me the body is a tool of what I call myself. I think my definition of finding a state could be an answer for bridging that paradox.

The self-censorship plays a huge role in creation. I do think it is important to question but I wonder the need to judge. Also because I’ve been in that position many times and I wonder if it is helpful. Also, according to John Cage, analyzing and creation are two very different processes and they shouldn’t be done together - I agree.
About the violence demand I was wondering If that has to do with the constant demand that choreographers have more and more on dancers excelling themselves. I wonder…

The warm-up given by Jack was extremely interesting for me. It was almost like exploring a totally different approach to movement for me. The most relevant aspects for me were the concepts of falling away horizontally, the idea of always having a counter direction, these invisible forces that are the directions, mechanisms of action and what/ how much investment we put in them (deconstruction of the mechanics of the movement), the simple and great notion that initiation, no matter, what always comes from your head (idea), mechanical body.

I don’t know why Jack asked if we were having fun while we were doing it. And I also don’t know why that shocked me extremely at that moment. Only today, after teaching I understood it. It is amazing how we constantly search for acceptance in what we are doing and how the fact that we please the other (students in my case) is so important for us. I see now, that we mostly give in to them in search of their recognition and we hope that they enjoy their moment with us and that’s when we start to fall apart.
I was not having fun at that moment but I was definitely enjoying it because I’m aware of the benefits of it and even if it was a warm-up I took it as a research. I needed time to dive deep in the complexity of his proposal. That was the moment that Jack gives and I take, in the sense that I try to go towards him more than the other way around. I don’t enjoy all processes day by day but I might enjoy them at the end of it all… Many of them carry conflicts and struggle and maybe those are the ones that I actually enjoyed the most.

I concluded also that for me is important to empty my mind to be able to receive new knowledge but not empty my previous experience (and that’s what stops me from neutrality) and that there is a huge power of the imagination in both Jack and Gabriella.

In Jack’s work session he manifested interest in how the material is generated and the dual experience of investigating something specific and unlocking your mind within.
Jack introduced many big and interesting concepts for me that I had to digest through time.

Then came another question of value, when Jack asked what of what we had been doing would have a stage value. It gather so much about the “how much do we say to the dancers, how much do we share with them, how much ambiguity is needed to create” and also it triggers one of my main questions:  How does the fact that I like or not the work influence my performance and how do I still make it work for me and for the choreographer?
And then on my mind I asked, a value for who? For me, for Jack, for the audience??
What was more interesting for me was the base of it – the shift of gravity to the side and to constantly fall horizontally and therefore its exploration into radically and the idea of the darkness of the centre. 

I wonder how for choreographers the fact that the dancers like their work is so important.
Somehow, from then on I had to question everything I did before. If I like it the choreographer uses it on stage, if not, not. Is it so? Then yes, the power is totally on the “dancers” in the creation and I question myself what is the pure core of the artistic input of the choreographer if he himself questions the value of it. And from that another question comes: How much democracy can there be in a process and how hierarchized is it? Does the “value” of something have to do with the fact of that “something” becoming the end product, a by-product, a waste, or just research? And are conflicts beneficial for a process or should we just avoid them?


My other two “revelations” of the day:

Acknowledgment: as in we do it for an audience and we take time for them to understand what we say, like what we do in verbal communication. If the audience wouldn’t be there we wouldn’t do it probably.

Triangulation: in this case, the way of looking of the performers has a lot of power. Performers should have the power or then, share it with the audience. When we give all the power to the audience they will eventually burn out. The same when two performers are too close to each other, there’s no space for a 3rd element – the audience. “Sustaining the tension of engagement”.

Jack also re-introduced the idea of presenting instead of re-presenting and said something that I think is directly related to communication in performance and can be applied in the relation dancer-choreographer: “You have to have power to communicate. You can’t loose power, not change anything and get it back. You have to change something in order to get it back.”



After that we had the work session of Gabriella: Open work, no fixed qualities, no states, nothing, time frame of 20min, a starting point and an ending point.
We should not feel like we had to entertain the audience but on the other hand, everything we do, we should do it for them, without cutting the power lines and not offering it all; attempting to touch the range of infinite possibilities in the time/space frame given, not making too easy choices.

Exposure/ Freedom of infinity
How can you be free, keeping the tension? How does that not block you?
Getting rid of tricks and devices to “make it work”.

Gabriella was not interested in kilos of physical activity, which could have been misled by her warm-up. However she is interested in the complexity of the being.

How do feedbacks condition my freedom? Do I have to co-respond to certain expectations the 2nd time around? The judging viewer does condition my freedom!

Are our choices free? Getting rid of habits is not it. It would be doing the habits and knowing you are doing them and actually choosing for them.

The Freedom issue is extremely interesting for me and I will continue about it in the next parts…. 
(to be continued).

#erin - second day final draft{: style='left: 916.167px; top: 463px;' }


Example of a written documentation:
Danslab second day: Gabriella Maiorino and Jack Gallagher
I was very curious to witness the working processes of Jack Gallagher and Gabriella Maiorino, their commonalities and stark differences.  During the first Edition of these encounters several  areas of interest had been established such as;  How information from the choreographer is received and processed by the dancer, the personal motivations of the dancer, the terminology used in the creative process, the use of weight, how to initiate the process and the topic of complexity.
Interestingly, these same topics sprang up during the second editions initial group conversation when trying to ascertain common areas of interest. There were also a couple of additions; how one can create a situation where movement and theatricality develop symbiotically (so that neither one is added as an after- thought ) and the challenge of how to allow both  dancer and choreographer to achieve a mental ‘ state’ or ‘ flow’ which will give rise to productivity and creativity but also can be used as a tool to unify the choreographer and dancer. According to the SantaTeresaLaboratory, It typically takes about 15 minutes of uninterrupted study to get into a state of ‘flow’ but whether this same time frame can be applied to dance is something I think is worthy of some exploration. However, the aspect  of ‘State’ and ‘flow’ that I was most interested in during this initial discussion was whether  achieving it is a joint responsibility between choreographer and dancer or whether the onus was on one party more than the other. 
How the choreographers ‘information is received and processed became immediately relevant during the joint warm of Gabriella and Jack. I observed that the familiarity of the working concepts greatly altered the efficiency of this process. To give an example; Gabriella had requested that the dancers allow themselves to be pushed by the space whilst keeping a constant emphasis on dropping their weight. Weight was evidently a familiar concept for all of the participating dancers yet being pushed by the space was not and this was apparent. Familiarity may not have been the only determining factor in this. I believe that complexity may also have been an influence. Within the context of this research, complexity can be categorized into three areas; the complexity of the dancer; their history, body type and character, that of the choreographer, and lastly the complexity of the actual work, all of which directly or indirectly had an effect in this case.
Complexity was also dealt with during Jacks working process. Specifically in this instance the complexity of the material. Jack asked the dancers to utilize counter directions in order to perform various exercises. In theory the use of counter directions sounds straight forward but in practice it can be problematic without a clear explanation. With this strong base in counter directions Jack then guided the dancers through an improvisation with changing body part focus. This section became very appealing to me as a viewer the moment that the dancers seemed excited and engaged by their task. It was during this creative high that Jack had cleverly introduced the paradox of making something serious and lighthearted in the same instance which he latterly explained as being one of his aims in his creative process.
I was reminded again of this exciting turn in the creative process when Jack asked “what from this last session would you consider worthy of putting on stage”.  For me this paradoxical moment was the part I as the observer would have chosen to put on stage but interestingly this was also the moment that the dancers pin pointed, which leads me on to the next subject, ‘the personal motivations of the dancers’. During our post first-phase discussion  we learned from Jack  that for him as a choreographer he likes to know which aspects of the work each dancer likes and why.  Most of the group were quite shocked by this admission however Jack went on to explain that for him, gaining this insight into his dancers mind is paramount in understanding how to maximize their potential within the frame of his work, once more we can recognise this as an issue of complexity.
After this inspiring discussion we continued on to the second-phase of Jacks time. At this point it was easy to see the positive effect this open discussion had on the group attitude. Jack began by asking the dancers to form two couples and one lone dancer. Within the couples each partner would directly and later indirectly give the other their own extremities whilst maintaining a constant audience directed focus, the lone dancer would execute the same task but use her imagination as her partner. At this point an organic cross pollination of ideas flowed between Jack and Gabriella.  For me this was the most inspiring part of the day and it was at this stage in the day when I first caught a glimpse of a symbiosis between theatricality and movement. Gabriella and Jack each noticed a crisis moment within the work, this crisis moment for Jack was anytime that the dancers took their focus from the audience. Jack proposed that this was due to a lack of audience acknowledgement and that at all times the dancers should direct their focus front. However for Gabriella this the moment of crisis was when the dancers gave too much focus to the audience and did not maintain an equal triangulation between themselves, their partner and the audience. 
We concluded the day with an example of Gabriella’s working process. Focus was an ingredient which Gabriella chose to highlight in her work though for her it manifested itself as the internal focus of the dancer. Gabriella gave a free reign with her improvisation but asked that the dancers keep in their minds eye the idea of exposure. Gabriella’s area of interest in this case was to see how the dancers deal with the concept of freedom combined with the directive of being constantly exposed. Again we see an example of complexity and the commonality between Jack and Gabriella here is that they were both interested in the psychology of the dancers though with differing motives. When clarifying her task to the dancers Gabriella asked that the dancers to have a busy mind but relaxed body, an echo of her warm-up, so that they would never allow their minds to pause. The terminology ‘pause’ was also used by Gabriella and then Jack earlier in the day to convey their desire to avoid a resting point for the body.
Terminology is an interesting area to pay attention to for both dancer and choreographer. Words are so multifunctional that it is very easy to misconstrue meaning.  This was something which we experienced at the very end of the day within Gabriella’s last improvisation task. The word ‘freedom’ compounded by the complexity of the task at hand and the complexity of the dancers proved to be problematic to process. 

My conclusion is to highlight the importance of complexity in any working process and the difficulty of  achieving a mental ‘state’ or ‘flow’ conducive to creativity in a limited period of time.

#erin - third day 1st draft{: style='left: 1861px; top: 465px;' }

##Danslab third day: Gabriella Maiorino and Giulia Mureddu

During our third encounter Gabriella had invited Giulia Mureddu to share her experience with us. The most prominent areas of interest I have chosen to highlight are: the use of Imagination; the subject of complexity and the importance of intimacy.
 During one of the first tasks, Gabriella encouraged the dancers to imagine their own bodies to be the same matter as the air that surrounded them. Matter is commonly said to exist in four states (or phases): solid, liquid, gas and plasma. In the realm of cosmology, extensions of the term matter are invoked to include dark matter and dark energy, these exotic forms of "matter" do not refer to matter as "building blocks", but rather to forms of mass and energy. This concept though quite advanced seemed to provoke a rather interesting movement quality in the dancers, more fullness and a sense of infinite movement possibilities. It was exciting to witness. I was reminded of how important the use of imagination can have on a dancers’ body during Giulia’s task. Giulia set out the parameters of her task, then proposed that the dancers allow their imagination to be their source for movement.  This way they do not compile a series of movements but instead to allow the symbiosis between body and mind be the motor to move whilst always aiming to surprise themselves with injections of other body parts or aspects of their imagination. This shifts the responsibility from the dancer to the format and produced a fantastic effect for me as a viewer as I felt that I was experiencing everything anew with each dancer though they were still completely in control. In both cases where both Giulia and Gabriella utilized the dancers imagination the result was extremely positive but this then led us on to question whether a busy mind can ever impair the body and thus act as a limitation in the creative process.
The complexity of a dancer is something we had been following quite closely within the last couple of encounters. Typically, complexity expresses a condition of numerous elements in a system and numerous forms of relationships among the elements. Within the context of these encounters complexity deals with the various aspects of the dancer and choreographer such as their history, character and body and also the complexity of the choreographic work. Later in the day Giulia had asked the dancers to close their eyes and to simply observe their body and mind. After some time they then were to read these observations and begin to amplify them. What was really beautiful about this task was how Giulia had managed to induce a state within the dancers which allowed them to bypass their complexity as dancers and to excavate only the movements which reflected their humanity. As a dancer I know how difficult it can be to produce pedestrian movements which do not hold within them any echo of dance so I was very pleased to see how Giulia managed to guide the dancers to this and was reminded of our previous encounter with Jack Gallagher when we questioned how much responsibility rests with the dancer and how much with the choreographer in issues such as implementing the use tools like imagination. However, the very interesting part came when the dancers were asked to amplify their movements to the extreme. I could see that all the dancers began to engage their minds so that their minds could then feed their impulses however, this I think could be an example of when a busy mind can limit a process. I could no longer see the passivity of the body in each movement and saw more interest in executing each movement rather than observing and amplifying a human impulse.  
Both Giulia and Gabriella were curious to investigate how to achieve intimacy with a new group of dancers. Intimacy generally refers to the feeling of being in a close personal association and belonging together. It is a familiar and very close connection with another as a result of a bond that is formed through knowledge and experience of the other. Genuine intimacy in human relationships requires dialogue, transparency, vulnerability and reciprocity. This can be directly applied to the dancer choreographer relationship. However, in a rehearsal, time can be an issue compounded by the fact that dancers frequently need a digesting period within the creative process so that they can absorb fully the work of the choreographer before moving onto the next stage in the work. A micro example of this could be observed during the day; Gabriella asked the dancers to move the space around them by moving the other dancers. At first the dancers struggled with this so Gabriella elaborated, they were at all times free to come in and out of the space to observe and then try again. By allowing the dancers these pauses when they came out of the space and could digest the task she sped up their learning curve and the effect was almost immediately evident. However, I suspect genuine intimacy between dancer and choreographer is achieved through the fullness of time. 
The next question which interested the whole group was how to achieve intimacy with your audience. I believe that in order for an audience to share an intimacy with the choreographer or performer they need to experience empathy. They need to feel a concern for the performer/s (and choreographer) that creates a desire to help them, experiencing emotions that match the performer’s emotions or knowing what the performer/choreographer is thinking or feeling ultimately blurring the line between the audience and performer/choreographer.  We tried a test experiment with Cristina. Cristina was given some directions from Giulia and Gabriella and was then asked to improvise. From watching I felt empathy for her in all of the awkward moments but this wasn’t necessarily shared by the others who were also watching. So we are presented with a dichotomy, it is important to know your audience and therefore anticipate their emotionally interpretations but each audience member will be unique as will be their interpretations so you will only achieve empathy with a few audience members at any one time. I hypothesize that one way to achieve majority audience intimacy is to establish a universal subject that the vast majority of audience members will be able to empathize with an example put forward by Gabriella was vulnerability. Or perhaps to incorporate various subject matters within the duration of the performance so that you will eventually gain the empathy of all the audience members and achieve the objective of audience intimacy.

#gab - series jack{: style='left: 2168px; top: 21px;' }


16 October 2011
Last meeting of the series of encounters between choreographers & dancers

My main theme will be the space of  "FREEDOM and UNKNOWN" in the process we explored with the 4 choreographers and the dancers



##Encounter with Jack:


With jack very interesting issues came in during the whole day. Somehow, I believe, in a more "underneath form", even though they generated as well seeds of conflicts, but still very present and all stimulating my reflections in a long time after.

Main words I would describe as:
FREEDOM, COMMUNICATION/INTENTIONS, ROLE OF THE CHOREOGRAPHER, PLEASURE.

- One of the first issues was: if you have the intention to work on specificity (specific material, technique, specific kind of body etc) with your dancers but you still want them to feel comfortable to use their own freedom in exploring this specificity, how do you set up the kind of communication with them? How do you present these 2 elements that could sound in contradiction from the first moment?   I believe there's a complex process in guiding them towards reaching a state of freedom in a very specific task (or technique), and I believe also that this process has to take an important part of time-energy and dedication from the choreographer. In this sense, I'm wondering: how do you build, in the studio, a "state" of availability and trust that can give the space of freedom we talk about? Which strategies to use, how "simple" elements of our being humans can help us in building this state?
At the same time I think that the dancer has to know that he-she is responsible for his-her being as a TOTAL being, there in the studio; with his-her own responsibility to be engaged, curios, free, maybe precise, maybe emotional, interested and vital and to be there, of course, as a human being and not as just a small part of it (for instance "just brain", for instance just "body lines", for instance "just emotions" etc). Imagination, as an example, is one element which I consider a pity to leave at home when you go in a studio, cause it is a personal (and NON_CONTROLLABLE FROM ANYBODY OUTSIDE YOU!) treasure and it can create a positive tension inside the person between what he-she is asked to do and what he-she can imagine about the task.
I would resume all of it with: the responsibility of the choreographer to create the right environment for the kind of "texture" or goal he wants to achieve; the responsibility of the dancer to be there as a complex individual interacting with this environment.

-Another, consequent issue was: if a creation or a research (even more) is a..."jump in the unknown", how do you, choreographer surrender to the fact that this jump regards you as well? Which kind of "guide" for the group you can be in this jumping in the vacuum process? Personally I think this is one of the most relevant element of our work: the ability to create a trustful environment, making clear from the beginning that you choreographer as well, are playing a magnificent but open game with the "potential", the "non existing yet", the "unknown" and therefore you have to contemplate the possibility of meeting often the emptiness, the doubt, the fragility and, quite often, the mistake. And the pleasure, of course.

About that, the issue of communication: what do you communicate, what do you keep secret and why? Which level of sharing we have or want to have with our dancers?

-After this meeting my prospective on some things has changed: we talked a lot about sharing the knowledge, and now I feel the need to create a space to share the non-knowledge, or the doubts, the holes, the critical moments in a process. (This is why I thought about creating the.."Freedom week").

-One similar question of the meeting with mor (and with giulia): reflecting on how much our roles of choreographers and teachers and blending, how much aware of that we are, how can we use it in a fruitful way for both experiences. (* see the point of Mor... " no borderlines between workshops, research, creation.......")

#gabriella - series mor{: style='left: 326px; top: 6px; width: 263.167px; height: 400.167px;' }


16 October 2011
Last meeting of the series of encounters between choreographers & dancers

My main theme will be the space of  "FREEDOM and UNKNOWN" in the process we explored with the 4 choreographers and the dancers


##First encounter, with MOR:

-Immediately very fruitful and inspiring discussions about the relation between choreographer and dancer, the fluidity of the process between them in the research and creation, the complexity of the language (including what is NOT SAID), the delicacy of what happens in the studio, all the fragility and "crisis" that in this process are involved.
The words that comes out to me after this meeting are:
TRANSPARENCY, AMBIGUITY, SOCIAL, FLUID, CRISIS

Mor involved himself in the warm up which was a kind of warm up somehow similar to what I often propose; it is not a so called technic, but a (TOTAL) way to prepare the body, the imaginary and the whole atmosphere of the room to what would happen after. The warm up melted with fluidity in a long improvisation section which didn't distinguished clearly itself from the previous preparation; this created in a first moment a sense of unclarity in me that I was watching, and I thought, partially also in the dancers. But little by little I recognized how much this "ambiguity" of specifying what are we doing exactly in this moment, what is required from the dancers etc, but the whole group, including me, the watcher, in a deep level of concentration, in a call for responsibility of each individual to participate actively in the process even though who was guiding was not NAMING what was happening.
We discussed afterward about this lack of sharp direction, taking it from all points of view.
I saw myself taking the position that often people take towards me in my creative process: trying to help clarifying things that mor was proposing, trying to put borderlines and divisions between things to make them more defined. As soon as I finished doing that, I felt extremely stupid! I'm fighting since years towards the attitude of wanting to make complexity more simple, to make the creative process able to be analyzed and somehow "banalyzed" etc, and then I see myself doing the same here with another choreographer.
This was a critical point and a critical moment for me, which was teaching me a lot: I want to underline then the importance of the depth of the communication between choreographer and dancer which I observe being more powerful and interesting than the "clarity" of it. A lot of things, in Mor's process, where verbally UNSAID, and because of that, created an extremely rich outcome. I saw him not separating his mind from his body, and this was reflecting in the richness and organicity of what was coming out from the dancers.
He works a lot on influencing each other, influencing the room and being influenced by that, and I decided to call this activity SOCIAL ACTIVITY, where whatever you do has consequences in the room. This simple concept was a revelation for me, cause it talked to me about RELATION, not being blocked by the "idea" that the choreographer originally has in his mind, but to let develope a series of chain reactions starting from a physical-emotional state. In this sense the choreographer becomes for me an initiator more than a leader and I think I like this distinction a lot. This also gives from the first moment a tone of..."happy responsibility" to the dancers who are not called there to fullfill tasks or make actions, but to be involved in an activity that can become also very personal, engaging and creative.

In this fluid activity was clear that there was no borderlines between workshops, research, creation, performing; Mor and I discussed a bit about it separately; we also talked about the trap in which we, as choreographers can fall easily, to search for the love and trust of our group of dancers so much, that we easily forget our creation point to satisfy the dancers wishes of doing something they like.
Again I found extremely interesting that with him all these elements, which can be stressing and confronting for us choreographers, emerged in the process in a very open way and we could discuss on them with transparency. Again I saw myself thinking that if the "self indulgence" can infact being a trap, at the same time there's a big value on the fact that we care a lot about establishing a "beautiful" relation in the process and with the dancers. Why not? Why should we by-pass this relation just giving tasks to the dancers to be executed as they would me machines? are we this kind of people in our daily life? no, we are not. The "traditional" relation where the choreographer enter in the studio and say what to do to a group of people who has no emotionl involvement in what they are doing, is for me absolutely out of question. And this meeting helped me to clarify this point even more, to make it stronger and more...calm inside myself. It would be for me probably impossible to work well with people I can't be involved fully, people who don't trust the process of entering in a special vital environment and abandoning mental structures to make a path that will bring all of us in another point of our lives. In this sense what happen in the studio between people has to have the same consistency of what happens in life: the same space for unknown, for not understanding, for feeling lost, for having fun, to interact, to observe, listen, to be frustrated and to share the frustration, to be fragile in the sense of recognizing the fragility as an important component of human nature and, ofcourse of its creative power.

-Taken more from the similarities of our approach, I forgot to mention what we, at the end, described as the fundamental distinction, again very inspiring for me:
I work with an intense mind in a free body
Mor works with a free mind in an intense body
Absolutely fascinating for me the possibility to try to shift our parameters and see what happens then!

#gabriella babette{: style='left: 589px; top: 469.667px;' }

I’m thinking about dancing
a selection of drawings & texts by Babette Wagenvoort
inspired by by choreographer Gabriella Maiorino’s
encounter series “Codes and languages in the
relationship between choreographers & dancers”,
Danslab Studio, The Hague, 2010.
Danslab 190610:
Hum & Zwing
in anticipation we hum and
zwing back and forth
a little glowing man whispers
about sea wind, about allowing the ‘I’ to grow
but first let’s try to get a bit warmer
even if your feet hurt
the whisperman brings us
in closer harmony
and still we forget to ask
how we are and who we carry
while we are humming
and letting go so lightly
when we don’t look we don’t zwing
instead we walk circles, we turn cartwheels
but her with the curls, she is dancing
as soon as she turns her slender wrists
softly lays her hands on her small breasts
or she stands with outstretched arms
whistling: do you see me now?
then come safely into my small home.
the little man’s soft reflecting
has pillows around his bones
screams in deafening rythm
we are going to meet each other
while he theatrically delivers his self
we stand, in expectation
of what we’ll have to haul
noting how small eyes shine on us
we hum amiably
we grin, we dissappear
we jump up and down in a serious giggle
we zwing harder
Babette Wagenvoort, 2010
Danslab 290610:
Falling Horizon
can I help you?
you seem a bit tense
yes, I find this horizontal
falling hard going
so I’m dancing in gloom
lines go through the space
and across your face
giving each plane its own worry
now stand where you feel best
or cry in someone else’s jar
there’s something in the air
outside it wants to rain
inside there’s sweat
this could get dangerous
this horizontal falling falls heavy
am i dancing what’s inside you?
am I dancing your dream dance?
or am I standing still
in an outstretched flat dream
that doesn’t want to be thought away
am I dancing now?
once you danced
with young people
it nestled close
today we are all
falling hard horizontally
with a limp arch
it falls here in my lap
I have become part of your devision of planes
and your thinking about pain thresholds
I can see your doleful knowing
Babette Wagenvoort, 2010
Danslab 030710:
Wet
warm women with doors and arms wide open
quietly look at the new face
of a girl with a blue drip-bottle
who dives her long legs in moist splits
we look as well, undress and spray water
bend over tables and glide
wetter than men’s eyes and swimming pools
unbridled from one direction to the next
the women’s veiled looks
they move us in deepest convidence
here we lie, together on abdomen
legs swaying high
hands and arms tell stories, feet answer obediently
toes near and far are nodding, shaking
stay still, undress in wonder
this body’s language - yours too - says more
this abundant climate where women play with bottles
while outside men drive away in ambulances
together on a soft questioning floor
together in water and beauty of bodies
you wouldn’t recognise this wonderbody anywhere
but the water is higher here
we’re going to need another ten teatowels
at least
Babette Wagenvoort, 2010
Danslab 040710:
No Further
fifteen people roll towards me like waves
they roll and roll upward in flowing movement
find edges, tumble, spread wide
I see an eye, lots of hairs, feet black from the floor
one tired tall person covers my room in just three go’s
his elbow touches the ceiling when he turns
his right knee pushes small plants off the window sil
now it’s getting personal
he rolls, rolls again. rolls his imprint
up to here
sometimes we go over, sometimes we crawl underneath
and sometimes we stay on the side just in case
we roll when we don’t know what to do
and we roll harder when things get difficult
from side to side we sweat until it tips
centripetal: hip, buttock, hip, shoulder, hip, shoulder,
foot, knee, foot
in a tent of wide pants
we roll over databanks
and just when we start to understand
a woman arrives, she says:
everything has been done before
she wants to decend, wants to put down a line
up to here
but the people and I continue to roll like waves
I roll and roll upwards in jerky movement
find edges, tumble, widely spread
I am an eye, lots of hairs, black feet
I roll up to here
and here
Babette Wagenvoort, 2010

#giulia - reaction after{: style='left: 1237.75px; top: 460px;' }

##Proposal
I will use the frame to expose one theme I am buzy with at the moment:
How close can you get to someone at to yourself and which are the strategies used?
I would like to frame this vast subject within the experience of the performer on the floor, in the relation maker-performer and within the experience of the maker on the floor.
In the first part I would like to share part of the methods I use during warming up and approaching a ‘first day of work’.
My departure is my interest in the exposure of the performer experience in the attempt to ‘execute’ a task. By activating a constant zig-zag dialogue between mental tasks and instinctual impulses I see that a process is generated of getting close and getting distant. Getting close in order to embrace impulses, getting distant in order to act upon those impulses. 
This finds its core in my desire to treat movement not as an execution of codes but as a process aiming towards an execution wherein sensations, history, in short the individual is involved.
In the second part I would like to bring out few points of discussion:
-	Comparing the work of the maker to the just mentioned process, I see myself navigating always between clear departure points or elements and so called grey areas, where the work is not in my hands but almost leading its own life. In these moments is crucial the ability to act upon, grasp arising new elements, the right elements.
What is here the experience of other makers and what do dancers experience when they feel they hit the right button? Why I could build up formats to train in this activity from the performative side but I feel I am far from a known training as a maker?
-	There is often a big and interesting incongruence in a scene between the intention of the performer and the goal of that scene, what the scene aims to communicate. This varies also from performer to performer. I see myself often weighing what needs to be said and how, avoiding psychological intention from the performers because meaning can be created by the composition itself. This can create distance between the maker and the performers. Deeper discussion can create confusion and lost of time. Is this in my case one difference between research and production? Because in a research till now I was not dealing with meaning but with raw material? Is this also a characteristic of an experienced dancer: the ability to zoom in and out, to keep distant from a task enough in order to avoid personal issues and treat it as a technical device but at the same time to surrender to it completely (get close to it) from his bodily point of view so that the experience is every time fresh?

Imagination: 
-	as a device to shift the responsibility to creativity.
-	To search for different sources to movement

Multiple body:
-	a collection of individual experience, history, memory and sensations
-	grasping the multiple bodies as an attempt to grasp the individual.


##After Saturday 3 of july:

It was very satisfying to be able to exchange with Gabriella, rather than present.
We managed to cross our knowledge, braking the wall of defence around the own work. And we did that through a big portion of practice.
What I take the most with me is a sense of fresh reviewing of the possibilities to brake your own patterns: for me is in practice a fresh input to not get stuck in the second phase of Prossimo, after a first structure is drafted. 
Answering to my first proposal I was touching a active stimulating of the ‘grey area’, but I still can not point out how.
I see also on the side of Hilde an opening up to go beyond what is already established. So we decided to meet before the process will start and embrace this feeling in a couple of ‘out of context’ rehearsals.

About the specific topic: relation maker-performer.
After this day I see I personally focussed more on the language and way of communicating inside physical and artistic subjects. What my information triggers in a performer that I don’t know and what gives me his/her interpretation.
I see that the interpretation of the dancer totally influence the work. In this sense it is always a co-author situation.
I did not concentrate on the psychological side and took for granted a role division.
In the end of the day I noticed that the issue hierarchy took a big attention.
I would call it more a role division. I do believe there is an enormous freedom inside a role division; in the end the work is made by the different parts. It is true that the obsession of the view on the performers is much bigger than on other roles, and this is probably because the dancer is the player and the instrument at the same time. 
It would be interesting for me to approach a process where there would be no leader. The concentration when I am a dancer for somebody else is very different than when I make, even if I dance my self. As a dancer there is a pleasant distance-surrender dynamic, the 2 terms are more clear and therefore it is for me more easy to throw myself in one or the other very fast. When I make a work the 2 terms fight with each other and they tend to take over and overwhelm me.
The no leader project would probably engage a different dynamic.

The non verbal exercise was interesting: it did not change much my approach but I saw a very different concentration from Hilde. As she said, her skin was open.
I am curious to apply a non verbal day in my next rehearsals.

#jack - reflections{: style='left: 5px; top: 469px;' }

Reflections on Danslab Frame: The Codes and Languages in the relationship between choreographers and dancers

June 29, 2010 

Session w/Jack Gallagher and his current Project team Tan Temel, Sernaz Demirel from Istanbul Dance Theater, and Marjolein Vogels

A challenging and confrontational Frame event, which is just how I like research. It was as if Maiorino just said to herself: “Let's expose the nitty and the gritty” or “Let's see what people really do in the studio”. Gabriella put immediately to the test weather or not participants can get to the heart of research about artistic practice. The Frame day immediately exposes questions like- What's going on in a normal work day? How is the dancer/choreographer relationship accessing the body, the inner contents? and what kind of participation is encouraged from what kind of leadership? All our artistic alliances, biases, political interpretations and all the judgements about a choreographers approach needed to be suspended, at least for a day. This was a rare occasion among professionals when professional maneuvers are left outside the door of the Danslab. 

As Gabriella and I took turns with the beginning phase of a work day, the warming up...the insights  based on comparison and contrast started raining down on us. Could our approaches be more different? Gabriella's approach was eye opening for me. She cuts immediately to the chase  thru guided improvisation.  I was amazed at how easily the dancers I have been working with started dancing their butts off!  Gabriella  provoked imagery from imaginary outside forces (which are innerly manifested projections of situations of course) and kept the exercising  constant and deep. 

I, on the other hand, start with the details. I start with a list of mechanical skills which during the warm up have no obvious emotional engagement, accept for what is contained already in someone's experience bank. My instructions and directions focus on a conscious contact with the structural physical body which focusses directly on cause and effect on a physical level. My warming up is about access to movement dialectics- directions and counter directions that when applied simultaneously, put the body in a position of movement generation and of self management.  This actually postpones any sort of comprehensive artistic mind/totality experience. 

I start from language based ideas and travel into the body with movement, Gabriella starts with visualizations and situations.

Imagine my delight at the seemingly impossible task for the dancers to switch back and forth! One moment in a totalized experiential engagement, the next moment asked to do two difficult directions with their pelvis and arms at the same time and see what happens. My admiration for the dancers who submitted themselves to such a radical incoherent experience for the sake of mapping the movement generation processes!

And then things turn around as they often do.  As I was the guest, I got to go first with taking things into a choreographic process. Now I am guiding improvisation with tasks that are designed to produce unpracticed movements and physical situations. I'm looking for dancers to discover movements that come out of complex inner dialogue. I'm looking for how inner dynamics arise to the surface. I refrain from explaining my artistic interests for the sake of letting it happen...revealing as we go. And I am surprised how people create within themselves a narrow perspective on what is called a “technical” approach, stimulated as it was by the approach to the physical structure of the moving body. Luckily Gabriella stepped in and helped me to explain that regardless of the focus I propose, I am interested in their personal responses and that when the dancers allow themselves the freedom to just experience it and see what comes up, then there is an actual result which includes the body I'm looking for, and indeed a body that Gabriella is also looking for, a body engaged with the inner and outer reality being produced.  This idea of the giving of permission was essential. A choreographer as leader or guide or director does need to establish the boundaries of what is being asked. I was very relieved to see a much larger scope of investment once it was established that any so called “technical' interest could also be experiential in nature. Indeed, we are all at one point or another traumatized by the idea of technique! 

As I placed the ideas into a more life like rehearsal situation, where there is a scene of sorts, we get deeper into my method. At this point, the fact that it is an “open session” really matters. Questions start coming from “behind the scenes” or “off the floor” from the participants who get to view from a safe distance. This is another revealing part of the Frame set up. Like Gabriella's intervention about giving permission, sometimes the most obvious questions from an “impartial” observer present a need and an opportunity to explain why i approach things like I do. I was asked why create a dependancy situation with dancers and obligations to the audience at the same time? And explanations in the proper context do wonders for the collective imagination. 

Witnessing Gabriella's approach to a choreographic exploration is very  refreshing. Again, the context of neutral comparison is the key. What isn't obvious with Gabriella's approach, what is left out, not said, not presented and not questioned is shouting at me. It's so different to me, that I almost can't find any bearings, yet the others are completely willing and able. The dancers face an oblivion: They can do what ever they want. The only condition- Find your freedom!. I'm getting “creepy crawlys” on my skin. What on earth does she mean by freedom? How can she evaluate it? What is she looking for? Material is blending into the body of the performer. They are becoming one. We are only looking at people. People who are contained not by skin, but by inhibitions. The only limit is what we find to be appropriate. And this also starts to move. Especially I, start creating with the my version of “inappropriate'. Its not “freedom” either. 

Difficult discussions arise, gladly not about what is freedom, but about what can we do as dancers, what should we do and how Gabriella might reflect upon our attempts. Interestingly here, Gabriella relies on her instincts. I've seen Theater directors behave exactly the same way: refusing to solve the problem. The problem is the conflict and we all know the conflict is the drama and the theater is about one kind of drama or another. How quickly we forget in the effort to get it right. I notice that the people Gabriella has worked with are not threatened at all. They are comfortable with the oblivion and the pursuit of... well, what ever Gabriella will select. If you are like me at this point, you want to know how she and her performers will capture fleeting, contextualized inspirations that produce behavior and movement that is ripe with necessity. How will the necessity building up from three “unsuccessful” trials survive? (Unsuccessful meaning without the earning of a chance to explore between boundaries, to deepen material out, to cut away the redundant in short....a chance to repeat!) How will the necessity be reborn into a dance/theater/performance situation? We will have to go to the theater for that. Clearly Maiorino's method is about peeling back layers of socialized content. My method is about triggering socialized contents.

What strikes me upon reflection is the necessity for devotion to a procedure which will activate the artistry with the people you work with. My dancers have more stamina with me, her dancers had more stamina with her. Needs are being tapped that the dancers identify with already. They are pursuing not only our goals but their own personal goals as well. I do wonder about the needs we and the dancers probably have which are not yet identified by us and I wonder who do we trust to suggest them to us? How do we become ready to find that we have more artistic needs than the one's we were previously aware of?  And when does another person's assessment of our needs present simply a life that we will not live? A dance that we will, in the end, not dance?  

I think success is directly related to clarity. And luckily Gabriella and her team had articulated a significant term for their pursuits. Ambiguity. I love this word. It clearly delineates a playing field. That which demands a search party. The party is over when we all know exactly what's going on. That's when we all move on.  At Danslab, we get to take home better questions than what we came in with. My new one is: “What kind of ambiguity is essential for your dancers to get engaged?” and “Is it the same one as what the audience might need?”  And since I know ambiguity leads to clarity and vise versa, I know my Frame weekend will resonate into my work. Thanks Gabriella!

#Dear Jette, {: style='left: 1855px; top: 19px;' }


After some thinking, I think that my most important question emerging from last Sunday is actually the most obvious one: 
What are the actual differences between the works of the two choreographers? 
and... What are the differences in the approach to the dancers, movement, phrasing, end product? 
         Can we define those differences out of the personal perspective of creation?


I will wait for the other questions in order to finish my writing and send it to you. 

Have a nice day
thank you  
Mor.

#reactions on gab : mor{: style='left: 370px; top: 469px; width: 215px; height: 400px;' }
hi everybody, here few lines about our first meeting of the series
choreographers and dancers.

practical/organization:

-I felt ofcourse the big absence of jette for this first
meeting-she'll be there all the other 3-, also because I had to take
care of a lot of things by myself, and i noticed once again how
difficult is to be inside a creative process and check the time and
schedule for each step of the frame etc etc. Impossible task for one
person, i would say!

-I missed also the presence of somebody helping to orientate the
discussion, even though i think it has been a very interesting
experience for everybody also the discussive moments; but once again
we were all physically and creatively involved, so, the presence of
another kind of eye and argumentative brain, i think would help a lot
these series to have more breath. Eventually somebody who could write
as well

-we had some doubts, i think it would be interesting to hear from mor
as well, about the organization of the day.Especially with Mor kind of
work (and also with mine i would say), the "warming up fase" and the
creative process itself are really smoothly going into each other, so
I would maybe suggest to let the first choreographer give a short warm
up in his/her own way and then go directly into the work. What do you
think about it?

-In general i think there has been the feeling that the time was too
short to be divided between 2 so intense experiences plus all the
moments of discussion; when i arrived to my proposal, in the
afternoon, i have to confess that i was already very full in the
mind...and in that case, egoistically, i would have been even more
intersted to just enter into Mor and his group way to work, to discuss
etc, rather than jumping a bit out of the blue into mine. Again i
don't know if i had this feeling also because of the lack of somebody
helping me with "framing" the frame.....but it is something to take in
consideration anyhow.

-The discussions and the work itself have been extremely interesting
for me, and here i just send you few lines just to share some of the
things which came out and took my attention:

some questions:
-what does a choreographer says as a first word when approach a group?
-which is the common terminology that we all use in the (europian)
dance community to talk to each other in the work?
-how do we achieve the necessary degree of intimacy in the studio in
order to get what we look for in the work?
-which are the personal motivations of the dancers in the work?
-how much the complexity of the discussion between the choreographer
and the dancers will be "saved" and visible in the final work?How much
of this conversation, or the trace of it, will be lost in the work
itself?
-how much the knowledge between choreographer and certain dancers
influence the kind of communication? how much influence has the time
we spend together on the understanding?
-how the dancers "receive" the words of the choreographer? how do they
process it inside themselves?
-as a dancer which kind of informations arrive to me faster and easier
and which not?
-what's the importance of non verbal language in this process?
-how much the taste of the dancer will influence his/her way to stay
in the performance?
-how do dancers and choreographers influence each other?



spare observations during the discussion and the process:

-not necessarily the division "dictative" against "democratic"
(attitude of a choreographer) means a specific result in the work. or
not?
-the choreographers are not necessarily prepared to deal with the
complexity of the people they work with; theatre's directors, for
instance, could  be seen as more prepared, as a formation, to work on
the person from many different sides. Psichic process, body, space,
time, motivation of the action, relations, emotions, thoughts etc etc.
 Is this coming from a mentality where the dancers are considered only
bodies, or even only movement entities?
-what's the difference between performers and dancers?


More lines soon about a closer look to the work of Mor and what was
attractive for me, which kind of communication i could observe, my
questions, what stay with me, my.....little conquers looking at him
working and reflecting on the questions we had in the session.

So, thanks a lot to Mor and to all the dancers and the artists who were with us.

hope to hear from you

gabriella


PS-reut, could you send this email to or as well and write me his
email? the one i have i think is wrong :(.  ah, and the one of staav
as well. thanxx




 
Hello everyone,
 
here are my few lines about our first meeting, I am afraid they are a bit of a mind twisting sometimes.. forgive me.
 
Vale

 
Danslab first day:
 
one of the questions that came up from the initial talk was:
what is the common language or terminology that is created amongst a group of people that work together?
 
After the warm up given by Mor I observed that a small but specific vocabular began to emerge spontaneously. This appeared to originate from the group’s need to communicate to each other the sensations, doubts, questions and thoughts and to agree on the words that can carry their messages.
Some of the words that arose from this first day and caught my attention were:
 
Ambiguity
Complexity
Vaccum
 
Ambiguity: Gabriella, Cristina and I felt in the warm up given by Mor a certain ambiguity in the explanation of the work assigned. This could be seen as a cause of confusion, but in fact it enabled me to retain a sense of openess and freedom in my body which helped me through the entire work despite the fact that I had no idea where the choreographer was taking us.
 
Complexity: this word appeared in relation to the fact that a dancer as human being is comprised of a multiplicity of both layers and elements.
For me there is a connection between this word and two out of the several questions that arose from the group at the beginning of the day:
 
-“How do I as choreographer prepare the dancer for the work that I’m going to propose to them?”
In relation to this question Gabriella said she noticed that when given a certain task if the dancers are treated as non-complex beings the result is usually something very two-dimensional. Instead when the dancers are considered in all their complexity what the choreographer in return receives from them is multi-dimensional.
 
In a more traditional vision dancers are required to execute the “steps” in a certain manner in order to realise what the choreographer asked.
Dancers are usually asked to perform very complex movements; but I believe on many occasions parts of the complexity of their body are not considered in the accomplishment of the movement required of them. Subsequently some elements of the complex body are detached from the part of the body that is envolved in the movement.
Is the complexity of the body something that is present naturally unless we inhibit it? If yes, I consider that when the dancer is executing a simple physical task the result of his movement may be not just physical but also including all the levels that belong to his complexity, the emotional, the intellectual, the spiritual exc.
 
 
Vaccum: Mor used the image of wind during the warm up as source of movement for the body as skeleton. He used the word vaccum to refer to the absence of this wind.
The word wind provided me with an aid in achieving a state of flow throughout the entire warm up.
The word vaccum raised more questions about how one would achieve it…
 

 
CRISTINA:
About the organization:

- I agree that the warm up together doesnt really work.
I think the day could simply be divided in a first introduction talk with the questions each person would like to approach, just like we did last week, and from then on have 2 work sessions, one with each choreographer and the respective talks at the end. Somehow the warm-up totally merges with the work session, at least in Mor and Gabriella's case. 


The most important questions/ words for me BEFORE the work session:

-Which information do I receive better as a dancer? what trigures me the most?
-As a director/choreographer/ teacher: how much information is enough and when is it too much? what is most efficient for creation: a clear task or a more metaphoric instruction?
-How does the fact that I like or not the work I am performing influences my performance and how do I still make it work?
-Specificity or Versatility (as a dancer)?
-Dancer or Performer?
-What's the ground 0 for the common language of dance?
-Importance of research? does it become a product when it is shown? what are the byproducts of it? waste? what of it becomes production?



The most important questions/ words / observations for me AFTER the work session:

- I believe that Trust and Intimacy are very important factors that condition the work, specially in such a short time of work.
I felt very confortable in the environment created that day. For me Availability, Adaptability, Negociation are extremely important contributors to build the trust and intimacy required in a process.

- Ambiguity. Mor's work session allowed space and freedom for me. Although I went through moments of doubt the fact that the task was not so clear made me go my own way. However i felt I could trust Mor in the way he was leading us.

- was very interesting for me to compare both "final" researches as different types of landscapes and describe the space as I perceive them from inside. Gabriella's stage as being full from a point of departure and almost like spiralling up in intensity, having a specific physicallity as a common ground for the performers and Mor departing from an empty and more social stage, focusing more on individuality.

- In relation to that me and Valentina were talking about the different schools of creation such as in sculpture and wondering if it is possible to apply the same methods to dance and who are examples of that in the comtempoary dance field. For example, the sculpture school where you add things to a mass, like Leonardo da Vinci and the one of Michelangelo who departs from a full stone and takes off matter until it becomes the end result. 

-I have to say I dont agree so much with defining the work with more emotional, or theatrical or physical etc... (refering to Reut about gabriella's research and the emotional interpretation of the physical task) For me, as a performer, something very important is to achieve a state instead of a shape. The state for me opens infinite possibilities and therefore I dont have the need to categorize the sort of action or emotion - they would be part of that same state. I see it from a complex point of view and in that case the emotionality wouldnt come on top of it, but would be part of it.

- Something very important, although very abstract, said by Mor and that was very interesting to me was: when you choose your spot think of the ressonance of the place you are in the room. 

- was also very interesting to observe how the fact that we change one only parameter to the same composition can change the work so much, such as when Reut said "humanize it".  Almost like a process of keeping the same structure/ space/ composition but changing the filter of colour of how you see it. I would find it intersting to discover more of these parameters.



Hmmm... It's a bit blurry and messy but I guess for now that's it.
Looking forward to Tuesday and also to have Jette around as an outside eye :)

xxxxx

cristina.

#reut - thoughts afterwards{: style='left: 1546.42px; top: 16px;' }
The space of ambiguity 
The breathing reflects on my space from inside. The empty spaces in side of me remained nameless. Deep holes of unknown which only fear can reach them.  I am doing my best to involve this emptiness as part of my personality, and mainly I remain hysterical. Fooling up, involving the soul.  Maximize the human in me. The wish to die is waken up.  Would you miss me then? 



From which spaces in us are we initiate creation from? Each source of initiation involved different questions.   
 The space of ambiguity =unknown, abstract, spirituality, reverberation, intuition, white zoon (what is it …?). 
The space of Known= emotions, psychological, ergs, estimation, opinions, mood (what do I do…...?). 
Mentally- mind, materialism, concept (why it is …..?). 





All of this emptiness is telling you, all of you is reflecting on the spaces in me. Maybe you it's what make me feel me lately.                                                                                        The space that has given to you by me it’s the most precious one.



Reut Shemesh


#Photo{: style='left: 16px; top: 5px; width: 300.167px; height: 443.167px;' }

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0380.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0384.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0394.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0425.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0428.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0439.jpg
||embed:img ]]


[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0442.jpg
||embed:img ]]


[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0463.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0479.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0502.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0521.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0558.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0576.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0578.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0581.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0712.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0715.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0757.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0761.jpg
||embed:img ]]

[[ embed::http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/repo/2009-2010/codes_and_languages/fotos_candl/dsc_0782.jpg
||embed:img ]]

# [[ http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/pages/Index/ | landing menu ]] {: style='top: 3px; left: 998px; height: 120.167px; width: 131.167px;' }

# [[ http://vps23323.public.cloudvps.com/pages/Publication_2009-2010/ | Publication_2009-2010 ]] {: style='top: 0px; left: 911.417px; height: 120.167px; width: 131.167px;' }

